README.md, before:

# GlyLES

A tool to convert IUPAC representation of Glycans into SMILES representation. This repo is still in the development 
phase; so, feel free to report any errors in the issues section.

## Specification and (current) Limitations

The exact specification, we're refering to when talking about "IUPAC representations of glycan", is given in the 
"Notes" section of this [website](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/glycans/snfg.html). But as this package is still in the 
development phase, not everything of the specification is implemented yet (especially not all monomers and side chains 
you can attach to monomers).

This implementation currently only works for glycans that fulfil certain properties:

* All monomers are given in D-Enantiomer, except fucose (Fuc) which has L-Enantiomer
* Linkages have to be explicit, i.e. `(a1-4)`
* The structure of the glycan can be represented as tree of the monomers with maximal branching factor 3.
* Only the 23 implemented monomers may participate in the glycan (see below)

For an overview of the implemented monomers, please look at the [README](glyles/grammar/README.md) in the grammar
folder. You can get a python-readable list of the currently included monomers with the following code

`````python
from glyles.glycans.factory import MonomerFactory

MonomerFactory.monomers()
`````

## Installation

So far, this package can only be downloaded from the python package index. So the installation with `pip` is very easy.
Just type

``````shell
pip install glyles
``````

and you're ready to use it as described below.

## Workflow

Convert the IUPAC into a SMILES representation using the handy `convert` method

``````python
from glyles.converter import convert

convert(glycan="Man(a1-2)Man", output_file="./test.txt")
``````

You can also use the `convert_generator` method to get generator over all SMILES:

``````python
from glyles.converter import convert_generator

for smiles in convert_generator(glycan_list=["Man(a1-2)Man a", "Man(a1-2)Man b"]):
    print(smiles)
``````

In general, the `convert` and `convert_generator` methods supports the same for types of input. The samples are shown
for `convert` but it's the same for `convert_generator`.

* single glycan, e.g. `convert(glycan="Man(a1-2)Man)"`,
* a list of glycans, e.g. `convert(glycan_list=["Man(a1-2)Man a", "Man(a1-2)Man"])`, and
* a file of glycans, e.g. `convert(glycan_file="./glycans.txt")`. Here its important that the file many only contain one
  IUPAC per line.
* for better runtime one can also provide a generator as input, e.g. `convert(glycan_generator=some_generator)`

The output for `convert` can be manifold as well. For `convert_generator` there is one output. `convert` supports

* `stdout` when specifying no output-related argument, or
* returned as list of tuples if `returning=true` is set, or
* writing to an `output_file`, e.g. `convert(glycan="Man(a1-2)Man", output_file="./out.csv")`.

Here each line of the output will state the input IUPAC and the output SMILES. In case of written output separated with 
a comma.


## Poetry

To develop this package I used the poetry package manager (see [here](https://python-poetry.org/) for a detailed
instruction). It has basically the same functionality as conda but supports the package management better and also 
supports distinguishing packages into those that are needed to use the package and those that are needed in the 
development of the package. In order to enable others to work on this repository, we also publish the exact 
specifications of out poetry environment.

Commit message:

Updating the READMEs and some minor changes in the tests section

README.md, after:

# GlyLES

A tool to convert IUPAC representation of Glycans into SMILES representation. This repo is still in the development 
phase; so, feel free to report any errors in the issues section.

## Specification and (current) Limitations

The exact specification, we're refering to when talking about "IUPAC representations of glycan", is given in the 
"Notes" section of this [website](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/glycans/snfg.html). But as this package is still in the 
development phase, not everything of the specification is implemented yet (especially not all monomers and side chains 
you can attach to monomers).

This implementation currently only works for glycans that fulfil certain properties:

* Linkages have to be explicit, i.e. `(a1-4)`
* The structure of the glycan can be represented as tree of the monomers with maximal branching factor 2.
* Only the root monomers (e.g. Glc, but not GlcNAc) from this [website](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/glycans/snfg.html) 
  and some derivatives of those are implemented so far

For an overview of the implemented derivatives, please look at the [README](glyles/grammar/README.md) in the grammar
folder. You can get a python-readable list of the currently included monomers with the following code

`````python
from glyles.glycans.factory.factory import MonomerFactory

MonomerFactory().monomer_names()
`````

## Installation

So far, this package can only be downloaded from the python package index. So the installation with `pip` is very easy.
Just type

``````shell
pip install glyles
``````

and you're ready to use it as described below. Use 

````shell
pip install --upgrade glyles
````

to upgrade the glyles package to the most recent version.

## Workflow

Convert the IUPAC into a SMILES representation using the handy `convert` method

``````python
from glyles.converter import convert

convert(glycan="Man(a1-2)Man", output_file="./test.txt")
``````

You can also use the `convert_generator` method to get generator over all SMILES:

``````python
from glyles.converter import convert_generator

for smiles in convert_generator(glycan_list=["Man(a1-2)Man a", "Man(a1-2)Man b"]):
    print(smiles)
``````

In general, the `convert` and `convert_generator` methods supports the same for types of input. The samples are shown
for `convert` but it's the same for `convert_generator`.

* single glycan, e.g. `convert(glycan="Man(a1-2)Man)"`,
* a list of glycans, e.g. `convert(glycan_list=["Man(a1-2)Man a", "Man(a1-2)Man"])`, and
* a file of glycans, e.g. `convert(glycan_file="./glycans.txt")`. Here its important that the file many only contain one
  IUPAC per line.
* for better runtime one can also provide a generator as input, e.g. `convert(glycan_generator=some_generator)`

The output for `convert` can be manifold as well. For `convert_generator` there is one output. `convert` supports

* `stdout` when specifying no output-related argument, or
* returned as list of tuples if `returning=true` is set, or
* writing to an `output_file`, e.g. `convert(glycan="Man(a1-2)Man", output_file="./out.csv")`.

Here each line of the output will state the input IUPAC and the output SMILES. In case of written output separated with 
a comma.


## Poetry

To develop this package I used the poetry package manager (see [here](https://python-poetry.org/) for a detailed
instruction). It has basically the same functionality as conda but supports the package management better and also 
supports distinguishing packages into those that are needed to use the package and those that are needed in the 
development of the package. In order to enable others to work on this repository, we also publish the exact 
specifications of out poetry environment.
